---
layout: posts
title: Bazel Conference 2017
---

Bazel team is pleased to announce our first annual [**Bazel Conference**](https://sites.google.com/corp/bazel.build/conference2017), focused on the needs of our community. The conference will feature user stories and feedback, migration talks, roadmap, hands-on and break-out tech sessions with Bazel engineers, contributors and users.

**Dates:**     November 6 and 7, 2017
**Location:** Sunnyvale, California 

**We are inspired** by our community engagement in the upcoming conference. We've received a large number of requests for talks and topics for discussion, and have scheduled tech talks by engineers at large and small companies on working with Bazel in wide variety of languages, including Scala, JavaScript and Go. We are looking forward to having 200 engineers from 35 companies across the world share their experience with Bazel.

**We are humbled** by the commitment to make Bazel even better, and are seeing engineers develop advanced features like Remote Execution, and sharing migration tips, tricks and tools. You will hear user stories and tips about iOS migration, and TensorFlow and Kubernetes experience with Bazel. We will also discuss as a community different tools out there that could be open sourced. 

**We are excited** to see all of you at this first annual [Bazel Conference](https://sites.google.com/corp/bazel.build/conference2017) in Sunnyvale, California on November 6 and 7, 2017! 

Register by October 15, as seating is limited and we won't allow walk-ins. Detailed schedule will be published mid October, and location details will be sent out to registered attendees.


*By [Helen Altshuler](https://github.com/helenalt)*
