---
layout: posts
title: "First-class resolved files"
authors:
  - aehlig
---

In an earlier blog post, we described how a [resolved file can be used to freeze
external dependencies](https://blog.bazel.build/2018/07/09/bazel-sync-and-resolved-file.html).

- Repository rules may indicate how their arguments have to be changed
  to produce identical output. This is the transition
  from following a branch to a fixed commit. The Starlark
  version of the `git_repository` rule already does that, and other rules
  will follow suit soon.

- With `bazel sync` there is a command to unconditionally fetch all external
  repositories, and with the `--experimental_repository_resolved_file` option
  all the reproducible descriptions can be collected in a Starlark value that
  is written to a file.

In this post, we describe some recently added features.
These changes have been comitted to the `HEAD` revision of Bazel and will
be part of the 0.19 release.

## Directly reading a resolved file instead of the `WORKSPACE` file

The resolved file can be used as a propoper substitute to the `WORKSPACE` file.
The option to enable this is `--experimental_resolved_file_instead_of_workspace`.
If specified, the `WORKSPACE` file will be completely ignored, and all
information about external repositories will be taken from the specified
file.

- In this way, the `WORKSPACE` file gets back its natural shape of describing
  which upstream repositories a build follows.
  It no longer needs to be aware of the use of a resolved
  file. Thus this approach can be used for existing projects following
  floating branches without changing the project in quesiton.
  For example, if following protobuf, the `WORKSPACE` file simply reads as
  follows.

```
load("@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl", "git_repository")

git_repository(
  name = "bazel_skylib",
  remote = "https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-skylib",
  branch = "master",
)

git_repository(
  name = "com_google_protobuf",
  remote = "https://github.com/google/protobuf",
  branch = "master",
)
```


- Getting a snapshot of the upstream respositories followed is still a simple
  `bazel sync --experimental_repository_resolved_file=resolved.bzl`, optionally
  followed by committing the newly obtained `resolved.bzl` after testing.

- `bazel build --experimental_resolved_file_instead_of_workspace=resolved.bzl ..`
  will take all information about external repositories from the file
  `resolved.bzl`. Thus, the build is fixed to the snapshot taken by the `bazel sync`.

## Verifying the output of a repository rule

The main purpose of freezing dependencies is to be able to replay a
particular build later, and also on a different machine. While `git`
is very good at producing the same directory when the same commit hash
is specified, the [programatic
transformations](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/blob/a9bb64b58d048913455513bf2a5db35475c360f0/tools/build_defs/repo/utils.bzl#L82)
may cause observable differences between multiple invocations. For
example, a build differing on two machines might be due to the tools
(such as `patch`, `sed`, `find`) being only mostly the same on each machine.

To detect such problems, we've added a new entry `output_tree_hash`
to the dict describing a repository. For example, the entry for
`com_google_protobuf` in the resolved file now looks as follows.

```
resolved = [
    ...
    {
        "original_rule_class": "@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl%git_repository",
        "original_attributes": {
            "name": "com_google_protobuf",
            "remote": "https://github.com/google/protobuf",
            "branch": "master"
        },
        "repositories": [
            {
                "rule_class": "@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl%git_repository",
                "output_tree_hash": "a776ce4f591327c6b23d88d367d6208a88af6ad889e08f7b86a0edfc76fcfd96",
                "attributes": {
                    "remote": "https://github.com/google/protobuf",
                    "commit": "a6e1cc7e328c45a0cb9856c530c8f6cd23314163",
                    "shallow_since": "2018-09-17",
                    "init_submodules": False,
                    "verbose": False,
                    "strip_prefix": "",
                    "patches": [],
                    "patch_tool": "patch",
                    "patch_args": [
                        "-p0"
                    ],
                    "patch_cmds": [],
                    "name": "com_google_protobuf"
                }
            }
        ]
    }

]
```

This new `output_tree_hash` entry is a [hash of the
directory](https://github.com/bazelbuild/proposals/blob/master/designs/2018-07-13-repository-hashing.md)
generated by the repository rule. It includes the names, contents, and
executability bit of all files. However, information that is likely to
be different between various users and won't affect most builds (like owner of
the files or the modification time) is ignored. Additionally, for symlinks to files
outside the repository, the content of the file is hashed, rather than the link
path itself; so the link generated by a `build_file` argument is not a problem.

The resolved file from which to take the hashes can be specifed with the
`--experimental_repository_hash_file` option. Of course, not for all types
of "external repositories" we even expect reproducible content. For example
the `cc_autoconf` rule is specifically designed to detect the local `C++`
toolchain, which might well differ from machine to machine. So, you can
use the `--experimental_verify_repository_rules` option to speicify wich rule
classes should be verified. For example,
`bazel build --experimental_repository_hash_file=resolved.bzl
--experimental_verify_repository_rules=@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl%git_repository
...` will verify the hashes of all git repositories, but not do any
verification for repositories generated by other rules.

If a mismatch is found, for example, because you added the not-so-hermetic
`patch_cmds = ["date +%s > .timestamp"]` to the rule for `com_google_protobuf`,
you will get an error like the following.

```
$ bazel-exp build @com_google_protobuf//:protobuf
Starting local Bazel server and connecting to it...
INFO: Repository rule 'com_google_protobuf' returned: {"remote": "https://github.com/google/protobuf", "commit": "a6e1cc7e328c45a0cb9856c530c8f6cd23314163", "shallow_since": "2018-09-17", "init_submodules": False, "verbose": False, "strip_prefix": "", "patches": [], "patch_tool": "patch", "patch_args": ["-p0"], "patch_cmds": ["date +%s > .timestamp"], "name": "com_google_protobuf"}
ERROR: Skipping '@com_google_protobuf//:protobuf': no such package '@com_google_protobuf//': git_repository rule //external:com_google_protobuf failed to create a directory with expected hash 416a412dbbb1fa4f822374844dffedeb0b582fda6ffda95afb7936fb2f378ca0
WARNING: Target pattern parsing failed.
ERROR: no such package '@com_google_protobuf//': git_repository rule //external:com_google_protobuf failed to create a directory with expected hash 416a412dbbb1fa4f822374844dffedeb0b582fda6ffda95afb7936fb2f378ca0
INFO: Elapsed time: 4.606s
INFO: 0 processes.
FAILED: Build did NOT complete successfully (0 packages loaded)
$
```

This way, you can be sure to build against the same source tree of your
external dependencies that you (or some one else) used when generating
the `resolved.bzl` file.

## `.bazelrc` to specify the use of `resolved.bzl`

As the whole workflow is controlled only by flags, this all can be set
up once in your configuration file. Just add the following to
your `.bazelrc`.

```
sync --experimental_repository_resolved_file=resolved.bzl
build --experimental_resolved_file_instead_of_workspace=resolved.bzl
build --experimental_repository_hash_file=resolved.bzl
build --experimental_verify_repository_rules=@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl%git_repository
```

And then all steps are as simple as they could be.

- To update you snapshot of external dependencies, simply type `bazel sync`.
  You might want to commit the updated `resolved.bzl`, once you have tested
  that the new snapshot works for your project.

- To build and test with the frozen dependencies, simply call `bazel build ...`
  or `bazel test ...` as usual. Note that you have to have a `resolved.bzl`
  first; either one committed to your repository, or generated by `bazel sync`
  earlier. You will stay at the fixed snapshot recorded in you `resolved.bzl`
  until you update it by another `bazel sync`.

And, whenever an external git repository is fetched, the hash of the resulting
directory (with all the local transformations specifed in the `patches` and
`patch_cmds` arguments already applied) is verified automatically.

## Your feedback needed

Resolved files can now be used to fix external dependencies. But does the way
it is implemented now fit your needs? We don't know and that's why the feature
is marked as experimental. Please help us make fixing dependencies suit your
needs by sending feedback to our discussion mailing list.
