---
layout: posts
title: "Starlark"
authors:
  - laurentlb
---

The stars are the limit! Bazel has evolved rapidly these past 3 years, and some
of the biggest changes have been to the build language. As the language becomes
more mature and the number of users grows, it becomes more and more important to
continue this evolution in a principled and open way.

For this reason, we are revamping the way we design and publish changes to the
build language. On the design side, it should be possible for anyone to see the
list of proposals and participate in active discussions. While this is useful
for any user, it is especially important to authors of tools that need to parse,
analyze, or update BUILD and bzl files. On the publishing side, we want to draw
a clear distinction between specification and implementation, establish a
canonical suite of conformance tests, and grow the ecosystem.

At the same time, its very name must also change for trademark reasons. We all
know and love the name "Skylark", but we'll grow to love the new name too. That
name is: **Starlark**. References to the old name will be updated in
documentation, but you may still see uses of the old name in source code. Like
the original name "Blaze" for Bazel, this represents the project's rich history
but is not canonical.

Our plan is as follows. The new
[Starlark repository](https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark) contains a
description of the language (and later of the functions needed to [create
rules](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/rules.html)). Changes to
the specification will be done via pull requests. Non-trivial changes will
follow a process that gives the community a greater opportunity to review and
discuss proposals. The process is very similar to the [new design process in
Bazel](https://github.com/bazelbuild/proposals), but using another repository
and focusing on an implementation-independent specification. We hope that the
greater transparency will elicit the feedback and participation we need in order
to make this language stellar.
