---
layout: posts
title: "Bazel 3.6"
authors:
  - laurentlb
---

[Bazel 3.6](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/releases/tag/3.6.0) is a [minor
release](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/3.6.0/backward-compatibility.html).
It is an incremental update to Bazel 3.5.

## Incompatible changes

*   The prelude file (`//tools/build_rules:prelude_bazel`) is now processed as
    a Starlark module, rather than being sourced into the BUILD file textually.
    This may cause slight breakages depending on the content of the prelude
    file. For more details, see the discussion in [issue
    #11940](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/11940).
*   The flag `--experimental_ui_limit_console_output` is removed. If you
    use `--experimental_ui_limit_console_output=1` to silence terminal
    output, you should use `--ui_event_filters=` instead.
*   The flag `--proto:instantiation_stack` must be enabled with
    `--record_rule_instantiation_callstack` to see call stack in proto output
    from Bazel query.
*   A few other flags are removed:
    `--experimental_ignore_deprecated_instrumentation_spec`,
    `--experimental_transparent_compression`, `--experimental_action_args`, and
    `--incompatible_no_support_tools_in_action_inputs`.

## Android

*   NDK 21 is now supported.
*   Building Android apps for legacy multidex (pre-L) now requires a main-dex
    list if the application does not fit into a single DEX file.

## C++

*   [`cc_common.compile`](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/lib/cc_common.html#compile)
    now supports `include_prefix` and `strip_include_prefix`.


## External repositories

*   Stop needlessly parsing WORKSPACE files from external repositories.
*   Dot (`.`) is now allowed in workspace names. See [issue #11837](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/11837).


## Starlark

*   In Starlark, the Args object supports a new parameter file format
    `flag_per_line`, compatible with the Abseil flags library.
*   The Starlark interpreter now correctly emits an error if the operand of the
	first loop in a list comprehension refers to a variable bound by a later
	loop, such as y in this example:
	```python
    [e1 for x in f(**y**) in e2 for y in e3] # error: undefined y`
    ```
    This may cause latent dynamic errors to become static errors.


## Execution

*   Added the `--experimental_worker_max_multiplex_instances` flag to configure
    the number of WorkRequests that are sent concurrently to one multiplex
    worker process. This flag has the same syntax as the
    `--worker-max-instances` flag. The `--worker_max_instances` flag are no
    longer used to determine max instances for multiplex workers, because the
    two have different resource requirements. Multiplex workers have an
    8-instance maximum, by default.
*   Added the `--experimental_worker_multiplex` flag, which is enabled by
    default. When enabled, multiplex workers are used for all mnemonics that
    support them.
*   Added support for a `supports-graceful-termination` execution requirement
    and tag, which causes Bazel to send a SIGTERM to any tagged actions before
    sending a delayed SIGKILL. This is to give actions, and more specifically
    tests, a chance to clean up after themselves.


## Other changes

*   Bazel now skips printing action stdout/stderr contents if they exceed
    `--experimental_ui_max_stdouterr_memory_bytes`.
*   A description of the Bazel codebase is now available in
    [CODEBASE.md](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/blob/master/CODEBASE.md#the-bazel-code-base),
    in the root of the Bazel repository. This can be useful to people willing to
    contribute to Bazel.


## Contributors

This release contains contributions from many people at Google, as well as
Benjamin Peterson, Daniel Wagner-Hall, David Ostrovsky, Emil Kattainen, George
Gensure, Keith Smiley, Michael Eisel, Per Halvor Tryggeseth, Ruixin Bao, Samuel
Giddins, Steeve Morin, Thi Doan, Tom de Goede, Ulf Adams, Zhongpeng Lin, and
mai12.
