---
layout: posts
title: "Bazel 3.5"
authors:
  - aiuto
---

[Bazel 3.5](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/releases/tag/3.5.0) has just been released.

Bazel 3.5 is a minor release. It is an incremental update to Bazel 3.4.

Basline: 889bc0b523b47eeb38a72bf9bb6858ee525a7c7e

Cherry picks:
-   a7a0d48fbeb059ee60e77580e5d05baeefdd5699: Make no-op starlark transition not affect the output directory.
-   b37c51c7085f0aefe04034dd451acb847605ddb5: Add include_prefix and strip_include_prefix to cc_common.compile
-   f6ad35fcde93f92c591778ed7db38d167f5bbc03: Delete --experimental_transparent_compression
-   39bc97eab295bddb35b38bfc4a2ff3d2b15d034e: Remove --experimental_action_args
-   b9706675a7abf6ceebb250f0b3dfa4087a0c35f6: Stop needlessly parsing WORKSPACE files from external repositories.
-   e574d558da17cfd0f818e7a937a07926aa270069: Allow hyphen char in workspace name
-   9993785fa0c4fa4172aa31d306f3abea76833abf: Allow dot ('.') in workspace names.

## Incompatible changes

- Removed the `--experimental_process_wrapper_wait_fix` flag.
- Removed the `--experimental_ui_deduplicate` flag.
- Removed the `--experimental_transparent_compression` flag.
- Removed the `--experimental_action_args` flag.
- Bazel now correctly prefers Xcode versions in `/Applications` over
  any other paths, which resolves an issue with accidentally picking up
  an Xcode version from a Time Machine backup or network disk. In the
  improbable case that you relied on the old behavior and Bazel now picks
  up Xcode from the wrong location, you can fix it by moving that Xcode
  version to /Applications.

## New features:

- cquery now follows aspects with --include_aspects.
- cc_common.compile support for include_prefix/strip_include_prefix
- Add support to bazel/crosstool for building arm64 on macos aka darwin

## Important changes:

- Fixed resource shrinking when tags are used.
- Remove legacy handling of `--extra_checks`
- Remove old incompatible flag `--incompatible_symlinked_sandbox_expands_tree_artifacts_in_runfiles_tree`.
- Update coverage configuration for Python, filegroup, and shell script
  rules to distinguish between source and dependency attributes.

- Add `InstrumentedFilesInfo` provider to Starlark globals.
- Make filegroup always forward `InstrumentedFilesProvider` and not
  collect any sources directly.
- Major changes to reporting of Starlark errors and the call stack.
  (Please be alert to possible regressions, such as errors that lack
   relevant location information.)
- Dot ('.') is now allowed in workspace names. See https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/11837.
- Support signing key rotation in android_binary
- `--apple_bitcode` now takes an optional platform and only applies the
  Bitcode mode to that platform if present. The option may be provided
  multiple times.
- Add opt in `oso_prefix_is_pwd` feature for Apple builds
- NS_BLOCK_ASSERTIONS is now passed for all Apple architectures.
- Java 14 is now supported through custom `toolchain_jdk_14`. `java_tools`
  repository provides a new release with JDK 14 java tools:
  https://github.com/bazelbuild/java_tools/releases/tag/javac14_v1.0.
  To build with toolchain 14 on Mac Os X, add this to `WORKSPACE`file:

```
# Java tools javac14 for Darwin
http_archive(
    name = "remote_java_tools_darwin",
    sha256 = "e20f002ceb3f3353d64c022e1f3400d8539ee56ffcfd4a6680d73d6a2cac938b",
    urls = [
        "https://mirror.bazel.build/bazel_java_tools/releases/javac14/v1.0/java_tools_javac14_darwin-v1.0.zip",
        "https://github.com/bazelbuild/java_tools/releases/download/javac14-v1.0/java_tools_javac14_darwin-v1.0.zip",
    ],
)

# Zulu OpenJDK for Darwin
http_archive(
    name = "openjdk14_darwin_archive",
    build_file_content = "java_runtime(name = 'runtime', srcs =  glob(['**']), visibility = ['//visibility:public'])",
    sha256 = "088bd4d0890acc9f032b738283bf0f26b2a55c50b02d1c8a12c451d8ddf080dd",
    strip_prefix = "zulu14.28.21-ca-jdk14.0.1-macosx_x64",
    urls = ["https://mirror.bazel.build/cdn.azul.com/zulu/bin/zulu14.28.21-ca-jdk14.0.1-macosx_x64.tar.gz"],
)
```
And invoke the build with these parameters:
```
$ bazel build \
     --java_toolchain=@remote_java_tools_darwin//:toolchain_jdk_14 \
     --host_java_toolchain=@remote_java_tools_darwin//:toolchain_jdk_14 \
     --javabase=@openjdk14_darwin_archive//:runtime \
     --host_javabase=@openjdk14_darwin_archive//:runtime \
   :foo
```


## Contributors

This release contains contributions from many people at Google, as well
as Adam Gross, Andrew Suffield, Benjamin Peterson, David Ostrovsky,
Ed Schouten, Greg Estren, Grzegorz Lukasik, Holger Freyther, Kalle
Johansson, Keith Smiley, Kerrick Staley, Kyle Teske, Mostyn Bramley-Moore,
Ryan Beasley, Ryan Pavlik, Siggi Simonarson, Stiopa Koltsov, Ulf Adams,
Xiaoyi Shi, Yannic Bonenberger, Yesudeep Mangalapilly, bnczk.
