---
layout: posts
title: "Bazel 2.2"
authors:
  - philwo
---

[Bazel 2.2](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/releases/tag/2.2.0) has just
been released.

Bazel 2.2 is intended to be backward-compatible with Bazel 2.0. There are no
known breaking changes in this release.

## Incompatible changes

*   The flag `--incompatible_windows_bashless_run_command` has been removed. It
    was flipped in Bazel 1.0
*   The flag `--incompatible_windows_native_test_wrapper` has been removed. It
    was flipped in Bazel 1.0
*   The flag `--incompatible_disallow_dict_lookup_unhashable_keys` has been
    removed.
*   The flag `--incompatible_remap_main_repo` has been removed.
*   The flag `--incompatible_disallow_unverified_http_downloads` has been
    removed.
*   Added the flag `--incompatible_applicable_licenses`. We plan to flip this
    flag in Bazel 4.0. See
    [#10687](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/10687) for details.
*   Added the flag `--incompatible_remove_ram_utilization_factor`. We plan to
    flip this flag in Bazel 3.0. See
    [#10730](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/10730) for details.
*   Added the flag
    `--incompatible_load_proto_toolchain_for_javalite_from_com_google_protobuf`
    to change the default value of `--proto_toolchain_for_javalite` to
    `@com_google_protobuf//:javalite_toolchain`. We plan to flip this flag in
    Bazel 3.0. See [#10335](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/10335)
    for details.

## cquery

*   cquery's `config()` now supports arbitrary configurations.
*   cquery: `//foo:bar` now means "all configured targets with label
    `//foo:bar`" instead of "choose an arbitrary configured target with label
    `//foo:bar`". See cquery docs for details.

## Documentation

*   `glob()` documentation is rewritten, and now it points out a pitfall of
    rules shadowing glob-matched files.

## External Repositories

*   `WORKSPACE` and `BUILD.bazel` files of `http_archive` repositories can now
    be patched using the `patch_cmds` and `patches` attributes.
*   Flags that affect external repositories like `--override_repository` can now
    be addressed in `bazelrc` files using the `common` command, without causing
    commands like `bazel shutdown` to fail.

## Starlark

*   The `--starlark_cpu_profile=` flag writes a profile in pprof format
    containing a statistical summary of CPU usage by all Starlark execution
    during the bazel command. Use it to identify slow Starlark functions in
    loading and analysis.

## Windows

*   Windows: we now discourage running Bazel from MSYS2 because of a newly found
    bug ([#10573](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/10573))

## Other changes

*   Actions with `parse` on the critical path should no longer finish in the
    future.
*   Reduced the packaging time (package-bazel.sh) for the `//src:bazel-dev`
    Bazel development build target from 14s to 6s. Use `//src:bazel-dev` if
    you're iterating rapidly on a local Bazel changes, and use `//src:bazel`
    with `--compilation_mode=opt` for release builds.

This release contains contributions from many people at Google, as well as
Alessandro Patti, Alex Kirchhoff, Artur Dryomov, Benjamin Peterson, Benjamin
Peterson, David Ostrovsky, Elliotte Rusty Harold, Eric Klein, George Chiramel,
George Gensure, Guillaume Bouchard, Hui-Zhi, John Millikin, Jonathan Springer,
Michael McLoughlin, Nikolaus Wittenstein, Nikolay Shelukhin, Yannic, Yannic
Bonenberger, aman, nikola-sh.
