---
layout: posts
title: "Bazel 3.3"
authors:
  - katre
---

[Bazel 3.3](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/releases/tag/3.3.0) has just been released.

Bazel 3.3 is a minor release. It is an incremental update to Bazel 3.2.

## Incompatible changes

The startup option `--fatal_event_bus_exceptions` is now a no-op and will be removed soon.

## Development

Bazel offers basic completion for the fish shell. To install, see [`//scripts/fish/README.md`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/blob/master/scripts/fish/README.md) or copy [`//scripts/fish/completions/bazel.fish`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/blob/master/scripts/fish/completions/bazel.fish) to `~/.config/fish/completions/bazel.fish` locally.

## C++

+   It is now possible to use the flag `--custom_malloc` and replace the default malloc implementation even for rules written in Starlark.
+   Previously, the output name for `cc_binary` targets that set `linkshared=1` had to match the target name, eg. `libfoo.so` or `foo.dll`. Now the target can be named `foo`, and the correct output name will be inferred from the target name.

## Apple

The `--watchos_cpus` flag accepts the value `arm64_32`.

## Action Execution

Bazel 3.3 allows you to use different action mnemonics while sharing the same pool of persistent workers by setting a new property on the execution requirements (`worker-key-mnemonic`). The value overrides the action's mnemonic for reusing worker processes.

## Contributors

This release contains contributions from many people at Google, as well as Abhishek Kumar, Adam Azarchs, Akira Baruah, Daniel Wagner-Hall, Derek Argueta, Jason Furmanek, Jiri Dank, Keith Smiley, Kseniia Vasilchuk, Matt Mackay, Michael Klemm, Nikolay Shelukhin, Patrick Balestra, Rui Chen, Siggi Simonarson, Tom de Goede, Vladimir Chebotarev, Yannic Bonenberger, and glukasiknuro.
